Great.
Do
you want anybody else to come and join you at the table, or are you-
I haven't been able to persuade any more than one so far.
But with your permission, Mr. Chair.
You're very shy in retiring all of you.
I meant to invite you in earlier, and...
As time goes on, depending on your questions-
They can come. Yeah
... we might call upon-
Sure
... particular subject matter experts.
Sure. But welcome. Welcome, all of you.
Good to see some familiar faces back again who've worked very hard on many bits of
legislation.
Yes, sir.
And we'll use your process. We'll open up for a few minutes of
anything you wanted to touch on, and then we'll go to questions.
Wonderful. Well, good afternoon, Mr. Chair and team.
Thank you very much for having me. I'm really looking forward to the opportunity to
discuss matters that are dear to all of our hearts, I'm sure, building and
construction.
I think I'll make my opening remarks pretty brief, because obviously we don't have
that much time together, and I'm just really keen to place myself in the hands of
the committee in terms of areas of interest for you.
I think I'd be remiss, though, if I didn't make three acknowledgments.
The first is that we've got a building sector in this country that has
many men and women who are hardworking, talented,
determined. They've faced a difficult time in the last few years, for many
of them, and different by different regions of the country and
according to their place in the process and so on.
But it has been a tough last several years.
But
my hope is that we can
reform our systems in a way that will make it easier and faster and more
affordable for them, of course, and for those who benefit from the built
environment in this country.
My second acknowledgment is of the committee itself.
You've worked very hard, if I may say, Mr.
Chair, you and your team, to provide great advice
and suggested changes,
all of which I think for many have been accepted in terms of legislation, and
goodness knows there's been a bit of that, and there may yet be more too,
through some combination of stages in the remaining parliamentary term.
So thank you for that. Genuinely grateful.
And I always make that point when I have the opportunity to give a second reading
speech in the house.
But allow me to-
We always appreciate it
... thank you. And the other one is the MB officials who have
been working on various items of reform,
I think I can say have been consistently hardworking, dedicated.
And the feedback I get from the sector about the level of
interaction and engagement from the MB officials has been
highly impressive. So I do want to take the opportunity to put it on record that
I'm grateful for them. And on that note, of course, you have a continuation,
effectively, of this session at the point that I depart, and you'll have a chance
to talk with them. So I don't want to steal their thunder in terms of anything
they'll say. And obviously, if there are organizational matters, I'll obviously
answer as best I can for the committee, but just to acknowledge the fact they'll be
available to you as well for the
technically second part of the hearing. But other than that, through you, Mr.
Chair, very happy to engage and of course answer any questions you may have.
Thank you. And thank you for your generous comments, and always thank you for your
generous comments during various debates when you...
So we always appreciate that.
Genuinely grateful, but thank you.
Thank you. Okay. I did offer the first question, and probably the
second question at least to Arena.
Thank you.
Arena, away you go.
Mr. Chair.
Yeah, you're welcome. One and two there first. No.
Thank you, Minister. You've got a busy program of reforms, and many of them we
agree with.
Yep.
And some we push you to go further and faster.
And we're coming from different perspectives.
I would have prioritized workforce constraints.
Your government constantly refers to planning system constraints as the
major ones. But I want to ask you genuinely About three things-
Yeah
... that are something we find common ground on, but disagreement around the
edges in terms of whether they are improving constraints on
supply. The first is overseas product.
Yeah.
Last year you were saying that about 250,000 products will be approved by
the end of this year.
Yeah.
It currently looks like about 19,000.
This is a market that's long been characterized by duopoly, that's vertically
integrated,
has exclusive distribution arrangements in the New Zealand market.
Is this a regulatory problem at all? Is this a market structure problem?
Thank you for that.
Were you intending to simply ask me-
Yeah, I've got a couple ones
... the one question?
Yeah.
Okay.
The second one is granny flats.
Yeah.
Building small dwellings cheaply, we support that.
I think everyone around this committee wants that to work.
Thank you.
But the pipes aren't in the ground.
And MBIE projected out that between 9,000 and
12,000 were going to be built. Yesterday, the housing minister
couldn't tell me how many have been built. Yeah.
And the third question is about infrastructure building.
Probably the thing where we have the most agreement around the house, that this
needs to be bipartisan and long-term.
But New Zealand's market under your watch is concentrating.
A smaller number of firms are capable of undertaking large scale civil and
construction
work, particularly water infrastructure.
Specialist engineering is being lost in New Zealand.
Homegrown company building capacity is scarce now,
not even just looking at the future pipeline.
So it's raising prices at the top end of town, but will rise prices later.
That's going to create real issues for building and construction in coming years.
Great. Okay, thank you. Mr. Joell, answer those or
respond to those three questions in the same order that they were posed.
In terms of overseas products, I'm grateful for the support around the house for
the proposition that we need to have a more competitive supply of building
products.
Of course, overseas approvals doesn't mean that we want a greater proportion
even than the existing 90% of products that are from overseas
to be introduced. And certainly we don't want to make life more
difficult for local suppliers and manufacturers and no one would suggest that's
the case. But I feel the need to place that on the record,
for the sake of completeness. In terms of the number that have been approved, it's
always been the case that with a relatively new
regime that would need to proceed carefully, we wanted
to
take a conservative approach. So while of course the
overall impact of the regime is to open up competition by making it
easier for products to be approved in this country, nevertheless, we
don't want to throw the baby out the bathwater and of course risk any kind
of
lowering of quality, sustainability or safety of materials and
therefore obviously the built environment.
In terms of the numbers, it might be that our MBIE
friends are able to advise more particularly what the running total is.
But I know that there are a couple of big ticket items in terms of
certification systems overseas whereby credible and comparable
jurisdictions have whole swathes of products, similar
products in some cases, that are able to be approved.
So I'm not
bothered by the fact that we will proceed at the pace that we can safely
do so, because obviously we don't want to risk
any suggestion whatsoever that we would have lower confidence as a result of
materials being approved in this country that wouldn't have been approved if they
had jumped through all the hoops that we're trying to avoid.
And my final comment in that regard, if I may, is simply that
improving competition should place downward pressure on price, and over time that
will increasingly be so as the shipments come in.
Goodness knows, supply shocks and other external factors associated
with those will, of course, play a part.
But it's not just downward pressure on prices we're after, it's greater innovation,
including for the purpose of improved sustainability of products such as
we see in overseas jurisdictions that we can and should benefit from in this
country.
And of course, simply to allow more options and
choices for homeowners and those who would design and build their
homes and commercial environment and so on.
Can I just pause for breath in case there's a particular
statistical input from our friends at MBIE in terms of the number of products
approved so far?
Yep.
Did you want to-
So I did a quick calculation.
Did you want to introduce yourself?
Oh, apologies for butting in. Yeah. Sorry.
David Paul, I'm the General Manager of the Building System Performance branch at
MBIE.
Thank you, as the minister said, for the opportunity to talk and for all the work
you've done most recently on the earthquake building stuff.
It's a big program of work that we've
brought through to you.
So look, just to answer the question, and I guess first thing is a little bit of
a proviso. The way the scheme works,
as you're probably very familiar with, is that in some cases we approve standards,
and then there's a whole lot of products that are approved under that standard that
would then get the automatic entry into the New Zealand market.
For those standards, we have no idea how many products may be sitting
behind them and relying on that standard.
What we do know for the ones that are more product specific
is that there are slightly north of 130,000 products that
have been approved so far,
and there'll be a lot more under the various standards.
Now, those are products that have been approved.
They're not necessarily in the New Zealand market, but they are products that have
been approved through the scheme.
Thank you. That's really helpful in my view, to have that number,
which I wasn't fast enough to find myself.
Going to your second point,
Ms. Williams, if I may, in terms of granny flats, the estimate, and I do
emphasize an estimate, was that some 13,000 such
new-
accommodation
types whose statues were dwelling, although they are a dwelling, a minor dwelling
of sorts.
Extra 13,000 over 10 years. Obviously, we're very early in the
process from the point of view that it was only in mid-January of this year that
the rules came into effect, both in terms of the resource management side of
things, which is led by Chris Bishop rather than me, but
also on the building consent side of things.
So, in the intervening five or so months, I
know there have been a number of such granny flats constructed, and indeed
I was in northwest Auckland yesterday, my own electorate actually, I'm
happy to report, and attended the official opening of one such granny
flat. Now,
there's one here, there's one there.
Clearly the pipeline will build, but the word is getting out there.
And so obviously I can't
wield a crystal ball to tell the member exactly what the numbers will be
over 10 years, and it may be fewer, it may be more than 13,000.
But I think the principle of the thing is important, which is that we are
proving that it is possible to use existing infrastructure,
where there is already a residential zone and usage of a property.
And of course, it's a detached dwelling of a
single story up to 70 square meters on an existing parcel of land where there is
already an existing dwelling. So from that point of view, we think it's helpful
between that and the self-certified elements whereby these relatively low-risk
structures are signed off in effect by the licensed building
practitioners and other qualified tradies who are doing the work.
So we think it's helpful both in terms of system reform more generally, but
also the particular outcomes for those who might or might not be grannies,
per the retail description of granny flats, but they might also be younger New
Zealanders, they might be farm workers, there might be others,
students, au pairs, other boarders who can benefit.
And so I pass to the third and final question or comment
regarding infrastructure. Technically, to the extent that
civil construction and other engineering falls
outside the Building Act, that's technically not within my remit.
But I can say clearly there are market forces that
we need to be alive to. We don't want to have
a market in which there isn't
competition either for practical reasons or, heaven forbid,
ways that the regulatory regime would
force a concentration that you've described.
So we know that's something we need to be mindful of and certainly talking with
ministerial colleagues who are variously the Minister for Infrastructure
and the Minister for Commerce and Consumer Affairs, that's something we need to be
mindful of, for sure.
If I can ask a different primary question then.
Yep.
Just
the budget contains
no new spending, and reasonably significant cuts
alongside a pretty ambitious reform program.
So I'm trying to understand what are the
trade-offs, what are the things that lose out because of that?
It's a 6.1% decrease in
the vote whilst at a time where, say, safety
standards
are a real focus. Asbestos contaminated fire doors this year,
increasing lead taps, blind cords that pose a serious risk to children, failing
imported window systems that make walls leak.
Those things indicate that we have ongoing issues
in New Zealand's buildings around maintaining quality and safety.
I'm not expecting you to solve it all, but is it getting worse?
Good question. I think there's quite a lot in that
question.
To speak to blind cords, technically it's a matter of
safety as opposed to building construction.
So a ministerial colleague
will be able to answer questions you have in that space.
I won't
speak on behalf of Brooke van Velden who would be the relevant minister,
I think. But in any case, it's not me.
In terms of--
apologies, that might be standards, that might be Cameron Brewer.
But in any case, I can't help you specifically on that one, but of course, it's an
important issue. In terms of leaking of windows
or doors, these are not new issues or problems.
But the thing I'm really pleased about the approach that MBIE has taken is that
they are very mindful of the need to enforce strongly standards
that were already in place and remain in place, and our
broadening of overseas approvals pathways doesn't actually change
the fact that when we have a set of rules, they must be enforced, and they can't be
undermined by fraud and forgery. There have been recent
instances that have been determined, and I'm very pleased to say that MBIE
has initiated enforcement action against those
entities behaving in that way. Because of course that's not good for the consumer,
but it's also an exercise in creating a non-level playing field for
those New Zealand manufacturers in particular who work hard and play by the rules
and deserve not to be disadvantaged in relative terms.
So, I think clearly there will always be issues
against which we need to be vigilant in the
built environment performance systems.
But I don't think anything in terms of the current budget would undermine that.
Indeed, we are working hard to ensure that there is
enforcement, including of the
BIPA, the Building Products Information-
Requirements
... Requirements. Thank you.
It was 50/50 between that and regulation
or regime. Anyway, requirements it is.
And where there have been reductions in budget, that really reflects the
discontinuation of programs that are no longer needed.
For example, for the passage of time since
where the tight homes
processes were always due to play out and finish at that time.
That, I guess, is my question. Which parts of
the vote are the things that are not a priority for you,
where MB could be finding cuts? Because with time with
officials later, we'll be able to delve into what their plan is to make those
pretty ambitious cuts that are bigger than Treasury has ever let any
previous government book. But in terms of, is it the building consent system?
Probably not. Is it the occupational licensing and regulation system? Well, no.
We're seeing pretty hefty changes there. Is it product assurance?
Yeah.
You've said it's not. Is it building code?
There are no changes coming, but you've already got a big program of work on some
changes there, including to insulation and windows.
Is it standards work? Is it self-cert? Is it earthquake-prone building?
Yeah. I think I've identified one.
The other one is in terms of standards work, the ongoing work
needed to ensure that our building standards, as part of a general standards
regime, is fit for purpose and aligned with Australia particularly.
That will continue. What we did see in the most recent
couple of years is that a large effort has been made
to bring back together,
to re-joint New Zealand standards with Australian standards, because
over a period of time they drifted apart and that makes no sense
for
us relative to our trans-Tasman neighbor.
And with that work, having had a particular injection of cash over a two-year
period, and that having come to an end with us having played catch up,
effectively, the ongoing work in a business as usual kind of way will
continue now at a more modest level to ensure that
the building team plays its part to make sure that our standards are fit for
purpose, appropriate, modern, and aligned with Australia.
Just a-
Last one, yeah
... very brief question about that then.
I'm worried about the capacity of this team. This is a great team.
You constantly thank them for their work in your speeches.
We have been able to get some assurance to get on board with your program of reform
because it is work that is conducted to a very high standard.
You want to do insurance, you want to do joint and several liability.
Those are two things that flummoxed the Law Commission and MB in a previous
iteration. How are we going to do this stuff?
Are you going to your budget minister's meetings and advocating for this
department? Why are we seeing some of the biggest cuts to this
team being made in baseline savings, which will result in a 6% cut that's bigger
than Treasury ever lets a labor government make?
Yeah.
I
don't understand the final characterization about-
A 6% cut-
Yes
... sounds unachievable.
Well-
Is your chief executive out there saying that this is achievable?
Did you say that Treasury hasn't allowed previous governments to make cuts?
Because it's impossible to look at a department that's doing this much work and
say, "Where are you going to find the cuts?"
Well, I would say, as you've rightly acknowledged, they are doing the work.
They're doing it extremely well, and they've been recognized in official terms
by way of awards internal to MB as well as
the recognition I've quite rightly given them.
They're getting on and doing the work.
They are achieving things that previous iterations of MB could only have
dreamed about, including in terms of joint civil liability.
And you'll literally lose one in 20 of their staff under this current model.
As long as they continue to provide outstanding outcomes, then
I will be very happy. If that were not the case, then we would need to consider a
range of factors, of which resourcing would be one, but only one.
And in the meantime, I don't think you can argue with the product, and to me,
that's more important than a line item and a dollar sign, and an
FTE headcount. They're being smart about the way they're doing it, and I,
for one, am really grateful for that.
Okay. I've got a couple of supps. Dan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, Minister.
Just going back to the building products, that's fantastic news that
130,000 overseas products have been
approved. Any idea of just, I guess,
how do you get the information out there to the sector so that they actually start
taking up those opportunities? So what is the plan for going
to disseminate that as quickly as possible so that we can start, we as
consumers, and can start seeing the benefits of those
150,000 products?
Yeah. If I may say, I think that's a really astute question that Mr.
Bigweir poses because I've had to give a lot of thought to the fact that
we have on paper now a much more
enabling system. And yes, we've been careful
to ensure there are safeguards to make sure that we
don't lose the quality, safety, sustainability that we need.
But I think the main challenge is an understanding and
a willingness of those who
specify the products and building consent applications in the first instance.
Second, where there are changes that can be made
to provide a different or better or more
readily available product, that's traditionally been quite tough.
And some of that
is come... I'm sometimes told by those in the
industry that there are anti-competitive practices by certain providers.
I'm not a one-person commerce commission.
I can't determine that to be the case or not.
But I can say that
where every opportunity is available to speak to architects and design
LVPs, to talk to building consent authorities, and also
to amend the regulations that
we have now, whereby you can substitute in products more easily that
weren't specified. For example, plasterboard type A
may be less available due to supply shop
reasons, or turns out to be less affordable than
to substitute plasterboard type B or C, should be
much easier than it has in the past. We've made that change.
Whether or not that's broadly known and acted on is probably an
open question, which is why I say your query is a good one.
So that's ongoing work, I think, for all of us.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you.
Can I ask a supp on that?
You got a supp on that one as well. It's time. Do you have a supp?
It's around the standards.
Is that on the same issue?
Yeah, sort of.
Okay. Away you go. Okay, and then Dorina.
Minister, I just want to ask you about MBIE's stewardship of building standards.
I've had some really concerning conversations with stakeholders
recently.
They're concerned that MBIE's ability to update standards
in response to new information, knowledge, changes in design of
materials,
is just not responsive enough.
They gave me an example and maybe something you want to talk to officials about
later. I'm sure you can ask them after your session here.
They were told that to change a couple of words in a standard relating
to concrete could cost up to $50,000 in
MBIE time, that they would have to pay for that.
They've also described their concern that it took six years
following the Christchurch earthquakes to update some standards relating
to the way concrete performs. Now, I know that's potentially before
your time in this office here as minister.
But I'm wondering, do you have confidence in MBIE's stewardship of standards and
their ability to respond to the market?
Can I say,
I have confidence in the building systems and performance
team. They are the ones who I've interacted with on all these matters,
including that they have let me know the work that they've done with the broader
team, which sits outside building standards and performance in relation
to standards. So, I think in ministerial terms, and I'm not trying to reflect,
because obviously you raise an important issue.
I think that sits with Commerce and Consumer Affairs.
But the visibility that I've had from the building side has been really positive
in the time that I've been in the role.
I can't obviously speak to past performance.
I would say, of course, it's generally the case that
the sectors themselves tend to fund changes.
And there are advantages and disadvantages in that.
And of course, resources
could be made more available, and that would be a legitimate point to be raised.
And in fact, I think,
Honora Williams might have come close to making such a point, and that would be a
choice we could make, and that would
speed up things and place less of a burden on the sector to fund any such
changes.
Well, I think they appreciate they have a responsibility to develop the technical
knowledge and the technical support for a proposed change.
I think one of the concerns is that MBIE is not
necessarily responsive enough,
and that MBIE's own costs for carrying out their
evaluations appear to be excessive.
So have you heard similar reports?
That's not something of which I've had visibility.
I know generally speaking, there is always a tension between the idea that
the government, as opposed to the sector, would fund standards developments.
But more particularly than that, I can't be helpful.
It might be that that's something that MBIE would be able to comment on, whether
now, and I'll leave
of you and the Chair as to whether you invite that now or in the follow-up session.
I think if it's an issue that officials can deal with, let's do that with
officials.
Yeah.
Otherwise, it'll take too much of your time.
Yeah. Okay. Happy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Right. Okay.
Supplementaries on this. You've done right.
Okay, so, I just had one, which is just in terms of the granny
flats,
it might be one you can deal with very, very quickly.
I understand there were some issues with some sorts of paneling which
were intended to be caught but weren't. In other words, that they...
Yeah, and that's been fixed. Is that correct?
Yeah, I think-
I see some nodding going on in the background.
That's helpful. Thank you.
Yeah.
That's my answer then.
To which I would simply add,
we instituted the granny flats policy with the hope that it would
achieve certain aims, which we've discussed and with which you're well familiar.
It's been the case since then that we've been careful to ensure we listen
to the sector to make sure that if there are other
opportunities to broaden the scheme or the effect of the scheme without
undermining its purpose, then we would.
And in the case of structural insulated panels or SIPs, these
are a building
system that already have code mark approval in some cases, and
so it would seem anomalous not to be able to include those
in granny flat construction. But because of the way that we framed
the
reasonably basic, straightforward standard nature of
timber buildings, they weren't included in our original conception, which is why
we've-
It's a bit of an oversight, but we will get there.
I think it's a very fair summary, yeah.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Right.
Carlos.
Primary. And did I have another primary floating around somewhere off the state?
Yeah.
Okay. Okay. Carlos, where are you?
Thank you, Minister, for coming. We heard a lot of feedback from the sector.
One of the major issues is the workforce issues.
Yeah.
So how can budget 2026 actually support the role of the
workforce in this sector?
Yeah, thanks for that. I'm grateful for the question because of course, of all the
different elements that are needed to produce a great built environment for
Kiwis to live, work and play, and learn and do other things.
We need not only products, as we've been discussing, and processes,
going to the consenting regime. But of course, most importantly, people.
I think workforce are supported, first of all, when we have a
good set of rules that enable them to get on and do their work in as quick,
easy, and affordable fashion as possible.
We want to reduce the stress often on small business owners who are
tradies.
Not always, but often.
And so in that sense, I think the moves that we're making and the resource that we
continue to apply to those who are helping to formulate the rules is positive.
I know in the budget elsewhere, and that is to say beyond the
building and construction elements, there are
helpful moves to provide infrastructure.
Horizontal infrastructure in a way that is not relevant to the work that comes
under the Building Act, but of course, enables the provision of housing
developments and so on, which in turn is useful to the work that people need to do.
And of course, the work that people need to do is important because,
it's roughly speaking, one in 10 Kiwis are employed directly or indirectly in
property.
And of course, we understand the value of the sector To economic growth,
including in the regions, as well as all of those who need to have
residential, commercial, and infrastructure provided.
So for those reasons, I think there are good stories to be told in the workforce
picture, even as I acknowledge, of course, as I did previously, that there have
been difficult times for those in the sector, and there are lots of macroeconomic
factors that we can analyze and discuss, and even argue over, as far as that goes.
But I think
overall, I would say the outlook is positive.
The consenting numbers to the year ended April were 16% higher than the
previous 12 month period. So, while we don't want to
see a boom-bust cycle head towards a boom, we do want to see a steady upward
incline of growth, and so far, cautiously optimistic that's what we're seeing this
year.
Yes. I also want to follow up with one of the pilot program called Earn As
You Learn. So is Budget
2026 actually allocated more money to this pilot program
to expand to more region?
Yeah. That's right. I think, and it's helpful you've asked that question because I
think there is
a number of different things we can do to make sure we've got an educated
workforce. We do need an educated workforce in the trades because
increasingly,
we have technology available that is sophisticated.
Has the great
advantage of enabling huge productivity advances if we are able to
use it well, and from a regulatory point of view, we enable that in a sensible
fashion. But we're going to need educated Kiwis in the workforce
to do that. Part of the education, of course, starts at the compulsory
education sector. But beyond that, and for those who do
choose to move on quickly from school environment,
they might want to enter into a program such as Earn As You Learn.
Which is a little bit like an apprenticeship as a previous generation would have
known, but sometimes across different business providers.
So, I think that's a helpful move. And also, of course, going back
to the compulsory education sector, to have building and construction
qualifications towards what one can walk away from
school with, as a young man or woman wanting to make
a career in the building and construction trades.
That's a really helpful innovation, to my mind.
It's the work of Erica Stanford, not Chris Penk.
And while I'm at it, the work of Penny Simmonds in terms of setting up industry
skills boards with relevant industry-connected
expertise. Again, it's not my work, but I think it's part of that overall picture
that's going to be helpful for our workforce issues into the future.
Thank you.
Cool. Thanks.
Dave.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Just heading to the consenting systems
because that seems to has been a big bugbear for a lot of people out
there.
You've taken some stuff away from the building consent system,
so you don't need to go through it. But just want to get a sense on
your reform program to speed up building consents,
and then secondly, how you're monitoring
those changes. So are we actually seeing
a reduction in building consent authority processing times?
Any observations that you might have would be
helpful. Thanks.
Perhaps if you could sort of lay out the things that you'll be thinking of if you
get a free run at it over the next 12 months, what are
the kind of things that you'd like to see changed in terms of legislative program?
Yeah. Thanks very much, Mr. Chair, and to the member for his
question. I think there are lots of things we need to do in terms of building
consents processing. We want it to be faster.
We want it to be no less rigorous. We want the quality, but then the
speed and the affordability also improve, and I know that sounds like an
exercise in
trying to
have it all ways. But I think the lack of productivity we've seen in the sector, by
some measures being as low as 1984,
pre-internet, let alone AI, and with New Zealand having a
much less
voluminous built environment, seems to me we can do much better.
I think the answer is to ensure that we have a balanced, proportionate
risk-based system.
And so the reforms that I'm about to describe, as you've invited, are
all geared around thinking about where there is work that is
bespoke,
or otherwise risky, or those doing the work are less
qualified or experienced or able to stand behind their own
work.
Where those things are true, we want no less scrutiny than we've had, and perhaps
arguably more. But for those relatively low risk types of
building, if you think granny flats as being single story structures
on existing parcels of land.
If you think about qualified registered professionals with consumer
protections in place, such as guarantees, warranties, insurance,
then we should be more trusting of those.
And so we sort of rebalance the system and make it more nuanced in that sense.
So, on that note, self-certification.
It's a phrase that has meaning across a number of different
fields. One is in terms of granny flats, which we've spoken about already.
Another is in terms of plumbers and drain layers, who will be able to certify that
their work meets the code in exactly the same way as electricians and gas
fitters are already able to do. And I know this committee's well aware of that
work, has contributed strongly to it, and in fact, made some very
significant suggestions for improvement at the time that that bill
was in front of them. So again, I just want to take the opportunity to thank you
for that. And then the other category of self-certification that we've talked
about but not yet introduced by way of legislation is the concept that
single repeatable designs of relatively straightforward residential
dwellings by entities that are able
to prove that they have quality assurance systems,
have a strong track record of work,
can stand behind their own work in the sense of liability if something were to
go wrong, and building at a sufficient scale to make it worth their while-
Could be able to self-certify their work into the future.
So that's the broad category of self-certification.
And then the other ways in which we're looking to make the building consent process
faster and easier is to say that
building consent authorities, which are mostly councils,
some 67, I think, city and district councils at the moment
should be able to consolidate their work within a region if they should choose.
So it's voluntary consolidation.
It doesn't cut across any other plans or
restructuring work in terms of water
or amalgamation with a capital A in that general sense.
And so to allow them to do that will mean that they can share resources, which
they welcome, human resources in terms of the people doing the inspections, doing
the consenting, doing the signing off at the end.
And if you're a builder or other tradie in an area and
you're building across different lines on a map that represent the jurisdictions of
relatively small councils, in some cases, you want the certainty and consistency
that you're not getting 67 different interpretations of a single building code
according to which side of a line on a map you might
be doing the building. So we think that'll be a positive step as well.
And then just on how are we actually going out there in the
building consent authorities-
Oh, yeah
... are you noticing a reduction overall,
some councils or building consent authorities doing better than others?
Yeah, thank you for that. Yeah, and I apologize.
You did in fact
pose that aspect of the question. I didn't get to it.
The first thing almost that we did was to say that there's a
lot of anecdotal evidence or anecdote
about the performance of different building consent authorities.
I think it's fair to say that the view you would have heard if you'd gone
around the country and listened, as I did, was that some councils perform really
well, others less so. And there are quite reasonable
justifications for that.
Sometimes it might go to resources, it might go to the geography of an area,
it might go to the challenges faced in the wake
of large flooding events or other natural disasters that,
of course, place a
disproportionate impact in a particular geographical area at a particular time.
And of course, overall, we've got that scenario where the joint and several
liability regime has meant that all councils have felt a great burden of
responsibility to their ratepayers, and as a ratepayer- ...
for it, that if something were to go wrong, if they were to miss
some sort of defect or shortfall in terms of what was provided in the consent,
the build as it was taking place as evidenced through inspections or the final
sign-off, then all the ratepayers would be on the hook for up to 100% of the value
of the cost of remediating.
So, changing to a
system of proportionate liability we think will be helpful in that regard.
And then to demonstrate the performance of those different councils, not for the
purpose of singling out or as a witch hunt, but actually to say what's the
reality on the ground, so I'm not relying on anecdotes and making recommendations.
We have collated and in fact required the provision of that
data on consent processing times to MB.
We've seen over the period of the two and a half years that we've been doing that
an improvement, even as within that period of time, the number of applications
has increased. So it's not just that there's less going on, so of course they can
get through it faster. And credit to councils who have worked
hard to make sure they do process in a very timely and
efficient fashion.
If I were being cynical, I'd say summer is the best form of disinfectant.
But in any case, all I can tell you is that we've seen improvement in that regard,
such that 95.2% of consent applications
were processed or completed within the statutory time frames in the year
of our Lord, 2025. And as for inspections, some
98.3% of those were completed within three working days
in the period of time since we introduced the inspection standards in 2025.
Of course, there's a technological ability through remote visual inspections to
get these kinds of gains. And again, I applaud the councils that are getting on and
doing exactly that.
I'm conscious that we only have seven minutes of your time.
I know you had a couple.
Wait.
Right. You wanted primary as well.
I have, Julianne.
Okay, sorry. Look, I'll go to Julianne.
But can we make both the questions and the answers a bit quicker, please?
Because I've got some questions as well.
Sure.
I don't want to miss out mine. Julianne.
In previous hearings, Minister,
we've heard that building for climate change work was still happening.
But I've had many discussions with people working in the sector who say it's
basically stopped completely. And that
not having that government support for
more energy efficient buildings, both performance and
construction, is
slowing down the industry.
Do you have any comment to that?
I
certainly wouldn't expect that it would or should slow down.
There's every incentive and increasingly an incentive for people to build in a
sustainable way, whether that goes to embodied carbon or operational carbon in
terms of the performance of the building, as you say.
There's no reason that that shouldn't be the case.
Indeed, with
other sources of energy other than solar panels, for
example, and the technology of solar getting much
improved in time and more affordable, and with regulatory changes we've made
to enable that to be conducted without a building consent,
and for faster processing of applications that include solar on rooftops.
That's an example of the fact that actually, if anything, the logic's getting
increasingly
Um, geared towards getting there sustainably.
Banks that offer sustainability loans, I think they might call them green loans.
You probably would enjoy that branding. But whatever, however they describe it.
And of course, consumer choice. Increasingly, people are aware of the benefits.
So there's no reason whatsoever that there should be less of that.
And I'd be surprised if there were.
But do you think government has a role to play in lifting performance?
Yeah, I think so. But I also think that the role of consumer
choice, because our fellow Kiwis are so mindful of the
benefits of greater insulation, for example, as such that
we need to encourage and educate. But to mandate
is not necessarily
always the panacea. In fact, I would argue it's not in this case.
But certainly regulatory relief that we're able to provide, including faster
consenting processing times for sustainable
build
plans.
And it's not always straightforward to measure these things, but there are ways of
doing it I think will make a great difference.
So I'm really optimistic between that and the external factors that I've already
outlined.
Is there going to be any shift to the metrics that were
discussed in Building for Climate Change that would put us
in a similar framework to places like British
Columbia and so many other places overseas,
where we're actually looking at
kilowatt hours per meter squared as a metric of
efficiency as opposed to the BPS?
Yeah.
One of the changes that we ended up making was with the
conversation around H1, which is, of course, the energy efficiency
chapter within the building code.
We've moved to methods of calculational modeling, which have a much
more holistic way of ensuring that there is
sustainability, but also human health and efficiency more
generally in the design and build from a point of view of sustainability.
And that's, anecdotally at least, that's proven helpful.
So there's no reason that we can't continue to improve our standards.
But I don't have a comparative analysis with British Columbia or know the
environmental factors such as their climate or the temperature range that might
differ from ours.
Well, I think it's
just about the method of assessing
what the minimum standard is.
Yeah.
And whether that's done in a way that's looking at the overall-
Yeah. I mean-
... energy needed. So you're not just looking at mandating a certain amount of
insulation. But-
Yeah
... can take into account window performance-
... anything else too.
Unless I've misunderstood your question, I think the answer is
as I've provided, and apologies if I've genuinely misunderstood you, that
the modeling method and even the calculation method are much better than the
blunt instrument approach that we'd seen previously in terms of the way that was
put forward. That's certainly my understanding.
But I would just say, for your benefit and for that of the Chair, if you
want me to invite MBIE members or we can do-
Do that. Yeah
... is we could pick that up in the next session.
Sure. Okay.
Yep. Okay. Yep, can do that.
Can I just ask, would you be willing to stay for another five minutes beyond the
4:00 if that's okay?
I think I'm available.
That's okay.
Please allow me to check. And if so, then of course I will happily stay.
I normally have something at 4:00, but let's go another five for-
Okay, great. Cool. That'd be lovely. Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister Ping, I think this will be an easy one for you.
Occupational licensing under this vote is intended to maintain practitioner
competence, manage conduct and support confidence in the sector.
So given the recent controversy that we've heard around health regulators
straying into ideological territory, are you confident that our
tradies will only be regulated according to their performance and
safety and not their political views?
Yes, I am. I'm very confident of that.
And these are conversations I'm happy to have with any
approving authorities for occupational licensing.
Okay, so these are expectations that you'd be happy to set for these
licensing authorities?
Yes.
Excellent. Thank you, Minister Ping.
No, thank you.
Two questions from me, which are both related.
Two pieces of legislation that we had through our
self-certifying plumbers and gasfitters.
Yeah.
And also the earthquake prone buildings.
Both of them had subsequent work to be done.
We spent quite a bit of time on that, and we had those conversations.
So really keen to understand where you've got to with the regulations sitting on
plumbers and gasfitters.
Yeah.
Plumbers and drainlayers.
And also, we had a lot of discussion about the earthquake prone building
methodologies, and that was actually pretty pivotal, we thought, in terms
of
not the one size fits all stuff and different model construction,
different story levels and where the buildings are built into the ground and all
that sort of stuff.
We got very exercised about, some in particular about Coastal Otago being
included.
Yeah.
And it was how we deal with that. So really keen to get some steer
on how that work's going.
Yeah. Thank you. In terms of earthquake prone buildings, again, acknowledged and
thank you for the work of this committee.
In terms of Coastal Otago, the
overarching point is that no one is going to be worse off in terms of their
occupations.
Got that. Yes.
Yeah.
It's the methodology that sits behind.
We've got the legislation.
Yeah.
But it's the methodology.
I can't remember exactly what it was called. Help me, somebody who's in that.
Matthew?
You're talking about the national science model.
Oh.
Oh, you're talking with the zones.
No, it's not the mo- It's-
The design.
Well, you might be talking about EPB methodology.
Yeah. That's it. The EPB methodology.
So there's the EPB methodology sitting behind that, and then on the plumbers
gasfitters one was the regulations.
So those two, how they work
makes a difference to, a real difference on the ground.
Yeah. In terms of the plumbers
and drainlayers,
certainly the work of bringing forward the regulations to support and give
effect to the primary legislation, and of course, it was the primary
legislation that this committee considered, but also did some real important
heavy lifting in terms of what the regs would look like to define relatively
straightforward work.
And
I think I'm right in saying those regulations have now been brought forward.
But-
The regulations were gazetted on the 9th of June.
Outstanding.
So the ink's drying on them as we speak. It's that hot off the press.
Very good. Well done.
If I was smarter, I would have sold that as an exclusive for the committee, but
that relies on you not having an internet connection and knowing where to find the
Gazette notices.
Yeah, the media are all over that one.
And the earthquake prone.
Yeah, I
think the thrust of your question, and Matt will correct me if I'm wrong, perhaps
in my absence, he said, looking at the clock.
Yeah.
Is that
we want to be led by the science and where it's possible to say, for example, that
Auckland, Northland, and Chatham Islands remain in a low seismic
risk zone.
No, it was much more nuanced than that.
It was really down to the actual individual building designs and the way it
interfaced with ground-
Okay
... levels and all sorts of other stuff.
I might leave you-
Okay. We will canvass that one. It's just that really wanted to note that work is
underway or being done and-
Oh, okay
... we'll deal with that. So perhaps if that was the question for you, for them, we
could deal with it differently.
It's certainly underway. Yeah.
Okay, cool. Carlos, you had a final question?
Just very fast. Yesterday, you got another announcement to cut
half of the working time on processing it.
Yes.
So probably if you still got time left, a little bit more information.
But my question is more like, a lot of issues like you mentioned is on the
government or local council level.
How can you implement all those changes to ensure that council
actually
work with us or manage to adopt those changes?
Yeah. On the second one first, I will say that I've had really good experiences
with councils, their leadership at elected and non-elected
level, but also the individual building inspectors, including through the
organization known as BOINZ, Building Officials Institute New Zealand.
And they've given great feedback.
They've told me about the issues and challenges they see.
So it's never been about saying we need to move faster or do things
differently, therefore, we're going to impose that upon them.
We can say, "Well, actually, what's the issue?" And sometimes when it comes to
big picture items like liability settings,
we've said simply, "Well, actually, you make a good point.
Let's change things." And without obviously reducing the protections for the
homeowners, which is why we've moved to the
compulsory guarantee, warranty, and insurance system.
In terms of project information memoranda or
memorandums, those who didn't do school C Latin,
PIMs as you say, the point there is that where
a granny flat is going to be built
in an area that we don't want to exacerbate issues of flooding or
natural hazards. We say you don't need a building consent or resource consent, but
we do expect and hope that you will know what the nature of the
property is. So a project information memorandum sets out the literal lie of the
land. Councils need to provide it.
And if they take up to 20 working days, then you know better off than if you'd
gotten a building consent in 20 working days.
So to halve or in fact to specify a time
within which that's got to be provided, namely 10 working days, is an exercise in
ensuring some sort of consistency, certainty, and the gains that we are
intending to see brought forward through the granny flat regime.
With that, really thank you for your,
as always, open answers and for working together with us
and with you over the last little while.
Thank you. I'm glad you thought they were open. And thank you very much, team.
I appreciate the opportunity. Cheers.
Thank you.
Are there other officials who wish to come up to the table?
Some of the things we've been talking about earlier
today.
So a lot of work the team has been doing,
and just wanted to acknowledge that, and also acknowledge
that there are a lot of things that the team is doing that don't necessarily get
the profile,
because they don't involve primary legislation.
So for example,
things like
introducing a three-year building code review so the sector has
certainty that changes will only happen on a three-year cycle,
unless there's life safety issues, et cetera.
There's a lot of work on data standards, which I think this committee might be
interested in knowing is happening given your interest in
the ongoing monitoring.
The various building code updates that are going on.
And that's on top of the standard work of supporting the minister
and
looking after the building code, and all those sorts of things that
we do.
We do a lot of outreach as well. So yesterday we had a webinar
with over 750 people
taking part to talk about the various changes
in the building system, and we do those on a reasonably regular basis
as well.
I also did just want to talk about
monitoring, because this is an issue that this committee raised last year,
and I think it was an important issue to be raised.
MBIE as an entity has quite strong data gathering
capability,
but we've really put a bit of an emphasis on it over the last
year, and particularly in terms of translating that raw data into what
actually may be able to be changed in the system.
And you've already asked questions around things
like numbers of granny flats, overseas building products,
the time frames for consenting, all those sorts of things.
That's something that we're really trying to put a bit of an emphasis on,
as well as the things that are coming up, the
impacts of the self-certification for plumbing and drain laying,
solar installations, and those sorts of things.
So I just really wanted to take the opportunity because it's something that was
raised by this committee last year to just sort of
raise that this is something that we are really trying to put a bit of a focus on,
is monitoring the state of the system and how it's progressing
insofar as we can. I think
the data standards project that I referenced
before is sort of trying to make sure that the data we're getting is
actually fit for purpose in terms of actually giving a consistent story, and that's
a bit of a challenge in its own right.
So those, sorry, Chair, I just wanted to make a few opening comments and-
I think that's great. Thank you. It was always good to hear about some of the bits
which are not quite so high profile, if you like.
Yeah.
Look, can I start off, and then I'm going to go Dan and
Tangi. I'll go, yeah, and then Simon.
And the only reason I'm going to start off is because I'd like a little bit more
explanation of the earthquake-prone building methodology,
and how that will play out. Because we got into that a little bit in
the bill,
but clearly there was some deep mysteries involved in it, which will
be good to have a little bit of explanation, because that makes a difference to
people on the ground.
Okay.
And
it'd be good to know what choices you've got within that methodology to say, "Well,
we could do this or this," and-
Yeah
... has that implication.
And sorry, you're probably all very familiar with Matt.
Oh, we are. We are. We're very pleased to have him.
And probably most of my team, so they probably need no introduction.
I want to choose Simon. I'm not sure if he's appeared.
I think you've been here probably once or twice.
Yeah. Simon Thomas, head of Building System Delivery and Assurance of—
Yes.
We've seen before.
Yeah. Cool. Okay. That's the first area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The committee might recall, we did touch on it a little bit, but we didn't get a
lot of time to dig into the detail on it.
You might recall that the EPB methodology, first of all, it's an
existing instrument in the current system.
So we're migrating that across into the new regime going forward, but that
framework already exists.
It will be a document that's made by chief executive, so it will
be a rule under the earthquake-prone building legislation once it's passed.
And the chief executive will have an obligation to go through a consultation
process before that methodology is made.
There'll be three parts to the methodology.
There will be the high-level methodology,
which will basically be a set of definitions and processes and procedures to go
to identify an EPB and then to remediate an EPB.
It's quite a high-level document.
Then there will be two annexes that go with the EPB methodology.
The second of the two annexes will relate to the remediation options,
which the committee had expressed some interest in a few weeks back.
And then the first annex will outline the choices
that are available to building owners in terms of going down the remediation
pathway. The second of the two annexes will have that prescriptive
detail, so there will be some standardized options there to remediate buildings so
the building owners have got
clarity around what their remediation obligations are.
And then there will be some more choice there around more
complex remediation solutions, such as for heavy concrete buildings,
where there will be some choices around identifying the high-risk deficiencies
in the building. So rather than going through a full retrofit process, a building
owner need only identify the most critically vulnerable parts of the building
and remediate those parts of the building, rather than having to go
to
34 or in excess of 34% of the NBS is required at the
moment.
So generally speaking there, we'll be moving away
from a one-size-fits-all kind of approach, which is the system that we
have at the moment. Everyone must remediate to at least 34% of the NBS,
to a much more flexible system.
But we'll be focusing only on the most critical parts of the building, and the
obligation will be to remediate those only.
So that's how we can start taking the cost out of the system.
For the URM's,
there was quite a lot of interest in unreinforced masonry buildings with the
committee a few weeks back.
The obligation there for one to two story URMs will
be to secure the facades only. So that's the most attractive
part of the building, and it's typically the part of the building that faces the
street frontage or where pedestrian activity is.
And there will be some choices in there about how that can be done.
So we are exploring some choices there around temporary remediation solutions.
You might recall there was some discussion around
creating more flexibility in the EPB methodology for temporary remediation
solutions,
right through to
what we call facade mitigation, which will simply be to secure the
facade to the building itself, which is generally it's
just
timber frames.
And the lessons that we learned from the Canterbury earthquakes is that,
you might recall that
a number of people lost their lives where the frontage of the building literally
collapsed out onto the street,
and people lost their lives because of the way in which the building failed in the
earthquake.
That will lead to something in the order of an 80% cost
saving for those kinds of buildings.
And then for the other buildings,
particularly for the heavy concrete buildings, if we can
get building owners focused on the high-risk deficiencies then we will add
down those in the EPB methodology and the annex system methodology.
We can start to drive down the cost of those remediation solutions quite
significantly as well.
So in short, all of that will be consulted on and things like-
There's an obligation to go through a consultation process. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So things like the widths of
compost blocks, et cetera, which is the Oamaru stone stuff, and mezzanine
floor things and floor heights and whatever.
All of that will be subject to-
All of that will be in the methodology and the annex system methodology. Yeah.
So watch that with a great deal of interest.
I do recall there's quite a lot of interest in Oamaru stone from
Oamaru.
Yes.
Yeah. And our engineer spoke to the committee on that and explained the
very marginal differences there between a normal URM building
and a Oamaru stone URM building. Not a lot in it, but.
I didn't think you said quite not a lot, but anyway, never mind.
I was just being hopeful. Dan, and then Tangi.
Just going back, before you mentioned about an amendment bill that's going to
be coming before Parliament. Is that the Building Amendment
Bill?
Excellent
Yeah, correct. So, some of the things that the minister was talking about are part
of an amendment bill, which is, we're hoping, this is
subject to Parliament's time, obviously, from an action-
Liability settings
Exactly. Liabilities, voluntary BCAs-
Yeah
... all those things are part of the
solar.
Yeah.
Will the bill also cover the mandatory home warranties, I
think, is
previously outlined last year?
Yes. Yeah.
Is that going to be covering-
That's the intention, yeah.
Okay, great.
We see that as a fairly fundamental part of changing the liability
settings. Yeah.
Great. And any indication on where that bill is?
Is it going to Cabinet soon?
That's not something I can comment on.
Yeah, no worries.
For no other reason than it seems to change regularly .
Yes. No worries. We look forward to seeing it.
That's probably sound.
Tanguy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. The
cuts to MBIE
over the four years is just over 8.2 billion, sorry,
million.
Come on, you're too used to NZTA.
We've moved into building construction.
Just over 8.2 million to the baseline.
Now, there have been a number of developments and improvements, and my apologies
if my colleague, Ms. Williams, asked this to the minister
before, but she's obviously aware of a number of examples
where previously there had been
items that would have been imported.
The list here, for example, asbestos contaminated doors imported,
increase in lead tap installations, blind cords, they do pose
not just a risk, but a serious actual risk to young
children.
Failing imported windows that make entire wall systems leak.
Given the extent of those cuts, what
level of confidence do you have in the maintenance-
I like your outfit
... of quality
and safety that that's actually not compromised
as a result of the reduction in
flow-through of finance?
So some of those things aren't necessarily building construction.
But the ones that are, Simon Thomas' area
is charged with doing those sorts of investigations.
So perhaps he can speak to that.
I think just before you do, I think while some of those items might not, I think
from a consumer household perspective, there is concern
about quality and safety across the board when it comes to someone
in a property.
So yeah, just interested in your thoughts around that.
Sure.
Specifically with regard to building products, one of the
functions within my team is to undertake investigations, both
proactive and reactive, into building, specifically building product
concerns. There are obviously other teams within MBIE who look at other consumer
products.
Mm.
You've raised the blinds issue in particular.
The consumer protection team has looked at that in the past, and has issued some
notices with regard to that, that I'm aware of.
But our team,
we undertake a number of
work in the proactive space. We proactively review the building product information
requirements for building products.
We actually have estimates measured for that next year of doing
5,000 of those reviews.
We did about 7,500
this year, so confident in being able to continue to do that.
Obviously, we also receive a number of complaints about various building products.
You've mentioned windows. You've mentioned the asbestos and fire
doors issue as well.
We will undertake those investigations as and when required.
Dedicated team for those. We've had a couple of prosecutions recently
that were successful.
One in Auckland in relation to forgery with regard to some documents
related to some fire protection systems, and one in Timaru for
forgery in relation to a code mark certificate.
We have another couple of matters before the courts at the moment.
So, we do look to undertake enforcement activity where we can.
Yeah. Pleased to hear that. Just in terms of the team that
undertakes that work-
Yes
... is there any reduction
or change in headcount,
in terms of FTEs doing that work?
Not in this coming year, no.
Not in the coming year? But similar-
No. We're maintaining our level of FTE, yes.
Beyond that, I
really can't speak to it at the moment.
All right. Thank you.
Simon.
Right.
Just coming back to
standards and the
system
that you operate.
You mentioned that you update the building code every three years.
What about the standards that sit behind it?
So when the minister was in the chair, I referred to the concrete
standard as material specifications, also a design standard.
Is that something that's also updated every three years?
Where is that on the program?
So
we have a program of rolling reviews for all the standards, and
in terms of the
individual who spoke to you about a $50,000 cost-
Mm
... we would usually, if it's a requirement or included in an
approved solution or a verification method, we would normally fund
that completely through MBIE for those ones that we
cite in our standards. So I'm not sure.
We'd need to find out a bit more about that specific-
Again, that's anecdotal.
Yeah.
Okay. Well, that's
helpful.
But how many standards are there
for
products, materials, design?
I couldn't tell you off the top of my head, I'm afraid.
Andrew?
If I may.
Come forth.
I'll just grab this one. It's right under your seat from coming onto your seat.
Sure, everyone. My name is Dave Gittings.
I'm the manager of the Building Performance-
Thanks
... Engineering team that is responsible for the technical documents that
supply for clients for building code and guidance.
You talked about the
standards. So we cite primary standards, around
300 standards within the compliance documents for building code.
Then there is secondary and tertiary, and they quickly come out to around the
3,000 mark. So-
Wow
... bringing them down to actually what the product standards are versus
the design standards is quite difficult.
Yeah.
Okay.
How many standards
do you think would sit with, say,
consumer affairs
in this matter, and how many sit in terms of within MB
in this other role? Because I think when the minister mentioned that some of them
might sit with another minister or another agency.
Yeah.
And-
We-- I'm sure we could get you that information.
Okay.
But remember, it's,
Standards New Zealand have thousands of standards.
Yeah.
A relatively small proportion will relate to building construction.
Okay.
So it's hard for me to answer that question. Sorry.
It's all right. Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Other questions, colleagues? I've got one that I've-
No.
Okay. Do you want to go, Carlos?
Yes. You know, this term of government, we actually changed a lot of
policy to shorten the consenting time.
So my question is more like, do long building consent
timeframe result... Is it because of council inefficiency,
unnecessary compliance requirement, or just they have a culture
of delaying approval?
I think it's a combination of things.
I think the minister talks about changing to the liability settings, moving away
from joint several liability to proportional.
Because joint and several liability necessarily brings a risk-averse approach,
particularly if you're going to end up holding the can for a building that's gone
wrong, and builders perhaps are phoenixed and are not available.
If you've had a fault, you get to pay for the whole lot.
So there's a natural risk aversion in doing that.
I think some of the processes that we've had have been
a little bit unhelpful.
And I think we're looking at speeding some of those things up, and the things we
can do in terms of the regulator. I also
think, so for example,
small councils are not necessarily skilled to do
sophisticated
multi-story work in some cases, and they usually pass
that on to
the bigger metropolitan councils.
But at the moment, if they, for example, wanted to come together
to form an entity to do that, they would
effectively be precluded from doing it.
So there are things in the regulations that we state that are
actually not helping councils to be efficient, and that's what we're
trying to address.
But also, I actually got some feedback from the sector that sometimes it's
the council culture causing the delay.
For example, they never will inform the developer all the
problems or issues at one go. They want them to do one by
one. They're causing a lot of back and forth.
Yeah.
Do you see that when you investigate those, or when you draft
those new policy, do you see this as the problem, one of the problem?
I think there are a range of issues, and I think some
of the changes that we're making will help those.
Difficult for me to talk to that specifically, although I have heard that as well.
Mm-hmm.
The other issues I hear is
concerns around things like fire reports, where a builder requires
a fire report, and then the council gets its
own fire report to check that the first one's okay.
And then the two of them disagree with each other, and then
things sort of grind to a halt.
Mm-hmm.
Sometimes a third report's required.
So there are things implicit within the system that are
outside, in some ways, the control of the council,
that are leading to inefficiencies.
Yeah, so we are aware of that, and we're hoping that some of the reforms that we're
bringing in will help to address some of those things.
Cool. Thank you.
Tania.
Thank you.
The use of AI,
what
do you understand is the impact on the work that you do
within MB as a result of AI
effectively sort of not just coming on spec,
but the increasing opportunities and,
I guess,
some limitations or concerns that might exist with that as well?
Yeah, I think it's a huge opportunity
to look at our systems and make better use of the technology to
make things more efficient.
In fact, Dr. Gittings here is sort of helping.
So we've got a multi-stream approach.
One of them is to look at where we can do things internally more efficiently.
So, the minister talked about building product information requirements
and how
that is quite a time-intensive process.
We've done a
pilot with AI to do that,
reduced
the time-intensive manual process by a matter of weeks,
so just by using AI to do checks on building product
information requirements.
So there's a lot of things we can do internally.
And I think, to be fair, we're at the start of that process.
But we also know there's a lot of things in the sector that could be
changed and will be changed through AI.
And so there are at least two private entities now that have a
AI system to check building consents.
So it's not proposed or promoted as a
replacement of the building inspection process, but it is something that
architects and designers can use to run a building
through and give them some red flags where things may not be
up to building code before it hits the council.
So there's a lot of good innovation, both internally to MB
and externally, around the use of AI.
It's obviously an emerging area. It's an area we need to be a bit careful of.
But certainly, there are significant prospects for efficiencies
The efficiencies that you touch on relate to this sort of
systemic approach to how business might be done.
Are there any indications as to an impact on head count
as a result of taking up some of these emerging AI
opportunities?
Nothing. So we've piloted some work,
and the impacts of that may have impacts on head count.
But at this point in time, it would be premature for me to
speculate on what that might look like, if at all.
Can I pursue a little bit more? So just with this,
$8.2 million over a four-year period,
where do you see those savings
being made
on the shop floor?
So when you talk about 8.2, are you talking about moving forward?
Yeah. So there's, I think, $2.2 to
$2.7 million reduction in the baseline in the first year, $2 million
subsequent years after that. It's
one thing to say, well, this budget delivers baseline savings
of $8.2 million.
Yeah.
What I want to know from you is what you translate that to
mean in terms of the operations that you
do.
Yeah.
The impact that that might have on staff.
Or your capacity to provide policy advice or-
Yeah
... to respond to those sorts of requests.
Yeah.
So where do you see those savings?
So in the current budget for next year, there's about a
$4.5 million reduction.
And that reduction has come via a
winding down of Weathertight Services.
It's come because we had a project to
realign New Zealand and Australian and international standards.
Mm-hmm.
That's something that's ongoing, but we were doing a catch-up, so that was
1.5 million that has been removed from the budget.
And then there were various relatively minor changes within the budget
itself. So moving from into next year, there is
a reduced baseline by about 4.5 million from those sorts of
things. In terms of future ongoing savings,
those are all things that, at this point in time,
the chief executive of MBIE is obviously working through those
issues, talking to people about where those
savings may be found. But I'm not aware of any specific,
or
there aren't any specific conclusions at this point, so-
Right. Okay. So it's more like the savings have been signaled as an
expectation, but the organization are still working through a process of
identifying how those savings will be realized.
Very much so.
Okay, thanks.
Okay, Julianne.
Yeah, I just wanted to bring up the building for climate change work
and whether the targets around kilowatt hours per meter
squared were
happening at all,
because, I mean, and just-
I'm sure we
are.
The last I saw, the average was
many times higher, almost 10 times higher than the best house
standard, for example, and there was a phased approach to reducing it.
I think there's a couple of dimensions to that question.
I might hand over to my colleague Dave in a moment.
But perhaps if I could just go back a step.
We are first of all committed to
the obligations under the Climate Change Response Act, which is
a trend towards net zero by 2050. And there are
provisions in the emissions reduction plan and the national adaptation
plan where we have a program of work underway as a contribution to that.
But that contribution is now taking more of a market-based approach where we let
the market lead,
take a greater role for the market.
But there are some key things that MBIE is still doing there that will help the
market make better informed decisions for themselves about how it's going to adapt
to climate change over time. So for example, we
have a national carbon repository where that can be
accessible. It's on the pilot phase at the moment, which will allow building owners
and architects and so on to determine the overall embodied carbon in the building
using different building techniques. So that's one thing.
So there's an incentive there by using that methodology to
provide the operational emissions and the embodied emissions in their building
designs. That's one thing.
And then there is a pilot underway to look at a register where
you may be able to look into
the embodied carbon products as well.
So building owners and architects and so on can access
these databases to determine what might be the overall emissions in their building
designs. And that's taken a much more market-based approach.
And that's all about
embodied, yeah.
Yes, it is embodied, yeah.
Anything on operational?
Dave, do you want to take that?
Yeah. So we are continuing with some-
Yes
... the technical work and that kilowatts per
square meter that you spoke about.
So,
at the moment we're focusing on what has been the overheating issue
with some of the design elements.
Yeah. There's that as well. Yeah.
But that ties into the ventilation-
Yes
... with the interstitial condensation-
... with building layout and design, and all of that comes into
play with a maximum temperature. So
how we can actually incorporate that.
And part of that would be then a flow on effect of
efficient energy use to be able to cool and heat the building-
Yeah
... efficiently.
Okay. And so you say you're working on it, but what does
that mean?
So we're looking at
proposing a higher temperature limit
for the 2031, I think, off the top of my head,
building code round. And that would include ventilation and
condensation.
And some of the insulation requirements
2031, so five years
from now, that might be something that we're building for, and
everything built up until then is still just
not really doing anything unless someone's really motivated as
a client building
Well, it's a fair point. Nobody's stopping anybody
doing that. But yeah, it is one of the downsides of having three-year reviews, is
if you miss '28-
Yeah
... the next review's '31.
If I may add a couple of other points of clarification to your question
earlier on. I think you had a question on energy efficiency retrofits, as
I recall.
And that is one of the actions in ERP2, is
to explore ways in which we can make it easier for householders
to retrofit existing dwellings. So that's an
action that we, we're committed to and we'll be looking at in terms of
future program of work. So it may give some
opportunities there for us to explore that's down the track.
And the other thing that we've been working on in partnership with
EECA and New Zealand Green Building Council is exploring the wider rollout of the
neighbors, which you're familiar with.
Mm-hmm.
So that is now being... We're supporting the wider rollout to supermarkets and
businesses. So there's quite a lot of interest in that space as well.
So the take-up is not as high as Australia,
but we are working with partners to increase the take-up of neighbors for different
types of buildings in the New Zealand context.
Last-
Can I-
You got one more? Yeah, go on. I mean, we've actually got a little bit of time.
I don't need- Yeah. I thought we would
Don't need to take it all, but
Yeah. No. Well, I guess,
yeah, I appreciate your answers.
What was raised with me, and this has been over the last few years, by
building practitioners who have qualified and worked overseas,
coming to New Zealand, finding that the way that we're
regulating minimum performance and building code
is making it much harder to do best
practice design to reduce energy consumption.
And one of the things that has been flagged with me by multiple people is
that using the kilowatt hours per meter squared metric
would be more sensible than what we're currently doing.
So I'm just trying to understand, because that,
it seemed like in the Building for Climate Change work that was happening,
but
that's pretty much stopped, and now it's just like, "Oh, we'll just do
nothing except produce building consents for solar
panels." Which, I mean, doesn't really help people who are trying to
design for
more energy efficiency. So, but you're saying, well, with the maximum
temperature requirements, which might come in in five years,
there'll be some additional work around insulation, and then-
As a package, yes
... as a package. And would that be looking at-
You mentioned, I think it was the BPI, which would-
Yeah.
Yeah. So if-
I called it, I said the wrong acronym
... looking at the BPI.
Yeah.
So, that would come out as well, because if you met some of these other
requirements, it would be, it would way surpass the BPI requirements.
Okay.
But, it's happening very slowly.
Yeah. That's, yeah.
I think you're just about getting to the-
Yeah. Okay
... the defined detail. But-
I just, I'm just trying to understand what's going on.
Okay. That's fine.
Yeah.
Can I ask one question, which is insurance?
So when we're going down all the self-certification processes,
there's a significant component there, which is a reliance on some of the
backstops.
Yeah.
Insurance, the longevity of insurance becomes important.
You expect a house to last quite a long time.
Insurance probably won't run that far.
Yeah.
How are we getting on with regimes to back the self-certification-
Yeah
... processes in terms of insurers to give end users-
... consumers
comfort that there's going to be somebody there if something goes wrong.
Yes. I'll invite
Alan.
And I know there's also, you might want to comment on Master-
Yeah. With the-
... Master Builders has a significant fund.
If a master builder does something wrong, I don't know if Master Plumbers
does the same or what, but-
Yeah. So, Master Builders has sort of a warranty scheme where their
first response is if something goes wrong, they will get somebody else
in to fix it rather than pay out money.
Yeah.
And that's the same with the certified builders and the Halo scheme, and that, I
think, in terms, that makes up currently about
43% of all new builds is sort of covered
by those schemes already.
But-
Sorry, so that's Master Builders. What'd you call it? Halo Scheme?
Halo, which is certified builders.
Yeah.
Um.
Oh, Halo. Yeah. Okay. Yep.
So-
43% covered. Yep
... yeah, I guess just stepping back a little bit with regards to the shifter
proportionate liability, which has been announced-
Yeah
... and the sort of the guarantees and warranties that sit under it.
What we know is there are existing schemes out there.
So David's mentioned, Master Builders, Halo, and there's also
Stanford Insurance, which is also operating.
It's called Stanford.
Stanford Insurance also have a warranty or a full
insurance product.
What we've been doing since that announcement is actually working with
insurers, the sector as well, and actually understanding appetite for
potential new providers to come in.
And,
the devil will be in the detail with regards to registration
processes for those products. But
anecdotally, at a high level, there is interest coming out of Australia
to potentially bring new warranty products into New Zealand
once the shifter liability goes ahead.
And also what we've heard also is underwriters out of London and
Paris, they do see an emerging opportunity
for those warranty products coming in to both New Zealand and
Australia. So at this stage, with the shift and the initial
announcement, and we know we're still drafting legislation and the regulations
that'll support that,
there are positive signs that there is
a potential increased competition coming in to provide those
schemes
I guess the key thing here is going to be the longevity of these.
Because at the moment, if something goes wrong with your house, probably it's
going to go wrong in the first 10 years or so.
Yeah.
You might not spot it.
But let's say the first 10, 15, whatever years.
Yeah.
Are we going to expect to see insurance products or warranty products that are
going to last for that length of time to give people some confidence?
No, so-
Is there an issue there?
Yeah. Well, with regards to the announcement by the government last year around the
changes to liability and the consumer protection support, was
essentially the warranty must be valid for one year for
defects and 10 years for structural issues, and the
ability for those to transfer between
homeowners during this period. That's the current state of those
warranty providers already in New Zealand. That is for 10 years.
So essentially, the decision was made to
bring in the standard processes that's already happening in the market.
And what we also see in terms of anecdotes, in terms of where there's a new build
and something does go wrong, it's in that five to seven year
gap after the build is complete.
Yeah. Okay.
I would've expected for a product that's supposed to last
50 years, and that's what we normally say a house is supposed to last, and if
it only lasted 50 years, you think you're being short-changed-
Yeah
... big time.
From a global perspective-
That's a long time beyond those kind of warranty periods.
So from a global perspective,
we've looked to Australia in terms of how their
warranty providers or products are provided. It's the same time limit.
So 10 year is your maximum you're going to get a-
Yes
... a guarantee or a warranty for a new build anywhere that we've found.
So if something went wrong with the building under the pre-existing
regime where it was joined at Seaford.
Yeah.
And you spotted it after 15 years, 20 years,
whatever-
There's no recourse
... you're out of luck with the building with consent authority as well.
Yeah. 10 years is the-
10 year stat.
Yeah.
And that's what we had with leaky buildings, wasn't it?
Yes, that's right. So that is sort of the status quo.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
Okay, that's helpful. I think.
At least it's clear.
Yeah.
It's clear that effectively hasn't
really changed in that way.
If the building amendment bill is introduced to Parliament,
no doubt it'll be on your desks.
Sorry.
If the building amendment bill is introduced-
Yeah
... then it will be on your desks to work through these
things.
Yeah. Cool. Okay. Look, colleagues, any last questions?
No.
Doesn't look like it. Looks like we have answered all the questions.
Really appreciate it. Thank you very much. Oh, sorry.
I got you to introduce yourself too because I don't think for the recording-
Yes, sorry. I'm Michael Warrens. I'm the manager of system and markets policy.
Thank you. Michael Warrens.
Warrens.
Yeah.
Warrens. Okay.
Thanks, Michael.
Brilliant. Thank you very much.
Very good.
Thank you all very much. And thank you also for all the work done over
all these pieces of legislation over the last quite some time.
Can I just ask a-
Oh, Julian, you've got one more.
I was trying to help. Just because a constituent has raised it with me recently.
Fair enough. You're asking for a friend.
Is there any
work that will be done on the requirements
around bidets in New Zealand? Because-
On what?
They require high hazard black backflow prevention
devices which adds-
He's our bidet expert
... thousands of dollars to the installation of something
that in another country would just cost a couple of hundred, and it just seems a
bit off.
I agree. You're talking about the inbuilt air gaps in the bidet systems
that can come in from overseas now, and that some are requiring, because
that air gap is only 25 mil, some of the
20 mil, and some of the standards require 25, that they're bringing in a
backflow prevention device in addition to that.
No, my understanding is every single configuration, whether it's
a toilet seat inbuilt or a
hose that's separately plumbed to the toilet, requires a
high hazard backflow prevention device and a whole lot of
additional plumbing. That adds thousands of dollars to something that might be
or a few hundred.
It depends on the situation and what's actually been proposed, but some of the
bidet systems are coming from overseas.
We are about to provide some advice around the air gap that's in there-
Oh, okay
... is sufficient.
Okay.
And-
That advice,
so I can get back to my constituent-
On that note
... and delay their building accordingly.
And on that note, I think we'll call it quits.
I don't
want to go any further down the details, especially of that nature.
Very specific.
Yeah, like how soon?
I think we'll call it quits. If you want to follow that one up, we will.
Okay.
Yeah.
You
can invite a written question.
Yes.
Or we can say your constituents-
Oh, okay.
Yeah, follow it up. Yeah. Okay, cool. Look, really appreciate it.
Thank you everyone again.
Thank you.
I think it's cultural discrimination.
Oh, now we're getting really deep.